doc/user: add reference docs for AWS PrivateLink connections (#15923)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/user/content/sql/create-connection.md

---

> A connection describes how to connect and authenticate to an external system you want Materialize to read data from. Once created, a connection is **reusable** across multiple [`CREATE SOURCE`](/sql/create-source), [`CREATE SINK`](/sql/create-sink), and `CREATE CONNECTION` statements.

Reviewer: I assume you added `CREATE CONNECTION` to cover CSR, SSH and PrivateLink connections, but this makes it pretty confusing. It should be enough to mention it under each of these connection types.

To use credentials that contain sensitive information (like passwords and SSL keys) in a connection, you must first [create secrets](/sql/create-secret) to securely store each credential in Materialize's secret management system. Credentials that are generally not sensitive (like usernames and SSL certificates) can be specified as plain `text`, or also stored as secrets.

> [//]: # "TODO(morsapaes) Adapt once sinks are wired up to use connections."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

to accept connections from the following AWS principal:

```
arn:aws:iam::664411391173:role/Materialize/<AWS-REGION>/<ENVIRONMENT-ID>/<CONNECTION-ID>
```

Fill in the values as follows:

  * **`AWS-REGION`**: The name of the AWS region in which your Materialize
    region is located. Either `us-east-1` or `eu-west-1`.
  * **`ENVIRONMENT-ID`**: The ID of your Materialize region. You can determine
    this ID by running `SELECT mz_environment_id()`.
  * **`CONNECTION-ID`**: The ID of the AWS PrivateLink connection in your
    Materialize region. You can determine this ID by querying
    [`mz_connections`].

For example:

```
arn:aws:iam::664411391173:role/Materialize/us-east-1/environment-4777bfc1-2bd8-4a13-a5dd-a44928652335-0/u23
```

See [Manage permissions](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/configure-endpoint-service.html#add-remove-permissions) in the AWS PrivateLink
documentation for details.

{{< warning >}}
Do **not** grant access to the entire Materialize AWS account (`arn:aws:iam::664411391173:root`). Doing so will allow **any** Materialize
customer to create a connection to your AWS PrivateLink service.
{{< /warning >}}

### Accepting connection requests

> If your AWS PrivateLink service is configured to to require acceptance of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your AWS PrivateLink service is configured to require acceptance of
```

connection requests, you must manually approve the connection request from
Materialize after executing `CREATE CONNECTION`. See [Accept or reject
connection requests](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/configure-endpoint-service.html#accept-reject-connection-requests) in the

> AWS PrivateLink documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AWS PrivateLink documentation for more details.
```

### Example

```sql
CREATE CONNECTION privatelink_svc TO AWS PRIVATELINK (
    SERVICE NAME 'com.amazonaws.vpce.us-east-1.vpce-svc-0e123abc123198abc',
    AVAILABILITY ZONES ('use1-az1', 'use1-az4')

> )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
);
```

```

## Confluent Schema Registry

A Confluent Schema Registry connection establishes a link to a [Confluent Schema
Registry] server.

> You can use Confluent Schema Registry connections in the [`FORMAT`] clause of
> [`CREATE SOURCE`] and [`CREATE SINK`].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use Confluent Schema Registry connections in [Kafka connections](#kafka).
```

`PASSWORD`                  | secret           |          | The password used to connect to the schema registry with basic HTTP authentication. This is compatible with the `ssl` options, which control the transport between Materialize and the CSR.
`USERNAME`                  | secret or `text` |          | The username used to connect to the schema registry with basic HTTP authentication. This is compatible with the `ssl` options, which control the transport between Materialize and the CSR.
`AWS PRIVATELINK`           | object name      |          | The name of an [AWS PrivateLink connection](#aws-privatelink) through which network traffic should be routed.

### Example

```sql
CREATE SECRET csr_ssl_crt AS '<CSR_SSL_CRT>';
CREATE SECRET csr_ssl_key AS '<CSR_SSL_KEY>';
CREATE SECRET csr_password AS '<CSR_PASSWORD>';

CREATE CONNECTION csr_ssl TO CONFLUENT SCHEMA REGISTRY (
    URL 'https://rp-f00000bar.data.vectorized.cloud:30993',
    SSL KEY = SECRET csr_ssl_key,
    SSL CERTIFICATE = SECRET csr_ssl_crt,
    USERNAME = 'foo',
    PASSWORD = SECRET csr_password
);
```

## Kafka

> A Kafka connection establishes a link to a [Kafka] cluster.

Reviewer: Does any validation happen when `CREATE CONNECTION` is run? As in, is this "describing how to connect", or is this "establishing a link"? If we only really connect on `CREATE SOURCE`, I would phrase it differently here. The current blurb for `CREATE SOURCE` is:

> [CREATE SOURCE](https://materialize.com/docs/sql/create-source/) connects Materialize to an external system you want to read data from, and provides details about how to decode and interpret that data.

`PASSWORD`                  | secret           |          | Password for the connection
`SSH TUNNEL`                | object name      |          | The name of an [SSH tunnel connection](#ssh-tunnel) through which network traffic should be routed.
`SSL CERTIFICATE AUTHORITY` | secret or `text` |          | The absolute path to the certificate authority (CA) certificate in PEM format. Used for both SSL client and server authentication. If unspecified, uses the system's default CA certificates.
`SSL MODE`                  | `text`           |          | Default: `disable`. Enables SSL connections if set to `require`, `verify_ca`, or `verify_full`.
`SSL CERTIFICATE`           | secret or `text` |          | Client SSL certificate in PEM format.
`SSL KEY`                   | secret           |          | Client SSL key in PEM format.
`USER`                      | `text`           | ✓        | Database username.
`AWS PRIVATELINK`           | object name      |          | The name of an [AWS PrivateLink connection](#aws-privatelink) through which network traffic should be routed.

> ### Example {#postgres-example}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Examples {#postgres-example}
```

);
```

> ### SSH tunneling {#postgres-ssh}

Reviewer: Not sure about adding it in this way, but I can reorg it later. We'll also need a PrivateLink example for Postgres, right?
